JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
after the attack.
We report from Berlin as a
manhunt continues.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Then: one
outcome of the
election, a rise of women
seeking long-term
contraceptive care, fearing
restrictions on
birth control coverage in the
new political
climate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus: part two of
our Bruce
Springsteen profile.
The rock legend opens up about
depression
and the joy of performing.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN, Musician: I
walk on stage,
I play, I perform, I create, I
write.
And that's where sort of that
peace comes
over me.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Islamic State
group has
claimed responsibility tonight
for the Berlin
truck attack that killed a dozen
people and
injured 50.
That word came hours after
German police let
their main suspect go.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports
from Berlin.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This normally
bustling Christmas
market was eerily quiet today,
as investigators
searched for clues.
Swathed in fog, and with armed
guards sealing
off the area, Berlin was coming
to terms with
its new status as a victim of
terrorism, after
Paris, Brussels and Nice.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel
spoke at a
morning news conference.
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
(through
translator): There is still a
lot that we
don't know about this act with
sufficient
certainty, but we must, as
things stand, assume
it was a terrorist attack.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Police detained
a Pakistani
asylum-seeker shortly after the
truck rammed
into a crowd of people on
Monday.
But, today, he was released, due
to insufficient
evidence.
Prosecutors said he matched a
description
of the suspected attacker, but
he denied any
involvement.
The truck, which had been
carrying steel beams,
was towed away earlier this
morning.
The body of a Polish truck
driver was found
inside the cabin.
He had been stabbed and shot
after being hijacked.
The gun used to kill him has yet
to be found.
PETER NEUMANN, Director,
International Center
for the Study of Radicalization,
King's College:
It was waiting to happen, no?
I'm not, like, totally
surprised.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Berlin is the
hometown of
terrorism expert Peter Neumann.
He believes German authorities
were too complacent
about the possibility of an
attack and didn't
offer sufficient protection to
the Christmas
markets.
PETER NEUMANN: I think, in
Germany, people
have been very blessed with the
idea that
they would be spared this kind
of attack.
And so I don't think that German
authorities
were thinking as systematically
about the
threat from terrorism as
authorities in Britain
have or authorities in other
countries.
This will have to change.
And there will be a very
uncomfortable discussion
in Germany about anti-terrorism
measures,
but also, of course, about the
relationship
with Muslim communities and with
refugees.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The chancellor
and other
senior officials laid white
roses at a makeshift
memorial to the victims.
They toured the market and were
briefed by
senior police officers.
Ordinary Berliners paid their
respects, laying
candles, flowers and messages of
sympathy.
Many said they believe this
attack marked
a turning point for Germany,
especially as,
for most of the past 24 hours,
they were under
the impression that the massacre
had been
perpetrated by an asylum-seeker
admitted under
Chancellor Merkel's open-door
refugee policy.
WOMAN: I definitely want to see
stricter border
control in Germany and in the
European Union.
I think I want to see more
cooperation between
the countries of the European
Union and regarding
refugee policy, because, at the
moment, it's
out of control.
MAN: I think it's not yet today
the time to
think about the consequences for
the refugee
politics.
I think today it's a question of
sadness and
come here, see people come
together, and bring
flowers.
And that's most important.
And I think we have a good
system of asylum-seekers.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Chancellor
Merkel warned
against letting the attack
change Germans'
way of life, but she
acknowledged her policies
were under new pressure.
ANGELA MERKEL (through
translator): I know
that it would be particularly
hard for us
all to bear it if it were to be
confirmed
that a person committed this
crime who sought
protection and asylum in
Germany.
This would be particularly
sickening for the
many, many Germans who work to
help refugees
every day and for the many
people who really
need our help and are making an
effort to
integrate in our country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: At the Berlin
State Parliament,
where flags were lowered to
half-mast, the
anti-immigrant Alternative for
Germany Party
and its regional deputy leader,
Ronald Glaser,
offered a harsher appraisal.
RONALD GLASER, Alternative for
Germany Party:
First of all, the terrorist is
to blame for
what happened.
On the other hand, Angela Merkel
and her welcome
culture made all these refugees
come to our
country.
And among them were a lot of
fanatics and
criminals.
She's not going to accept that
her policy
was wrong, but, of course, the
German people
is awakening and they maybe will
force her
to do so.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Just outside
the regional
parliament is the largest
remaining section
of the Berlin Wall, whose demise
27 years
ago led to Europe's open
borders.
There could not be a more
poignant reminder
of what's at stake as Europe
grapples with
terrorism and the wave of
migration across
the Mediterranean.
In the meantime, the German
capital remains
on high alert.
KLAUS KANDT, Berlin Police Chief
(through
translator): Of course people
are worried.
I believe people who live in the
city should
be vigilant.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Security has
also been tightened
at Christmas markets and other
outdoor venues
all across Europe, out of an
abundance of
caution.
And in Berlin this evening,
mourners gathered
for a candlelight vigil in the
same square
where the tragedy took place, as
Germany's
leaders attended a solemn
memorial service
at a nearby church.
The iconic Brandenburg Gate was
illuminated
with the images of both the
German and Berlin
flags.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Malcolm joins
me now from
Berlin.
Malcolm, now that ISIS has
claimed responsibility,
how is that affecting thinking
there?
MALCOLM BRABANT: It's not really
made that
much of an impact, to be honest.
The German interior minister
acknowledged
that ISIS had made this claim,
but he didn't
really react to it.
I don't think anybody is
particularly surprised.
This attack was right out of the
jihadist
playbook.
It's the sort of language in the
claim that
they have made that they have
used before.
But what, I think, ISIS has
achieved by saying
what they have done is that they
have perhaps
helped to polarize Germany.
They have helped to perhaps
drive people into
the arms of the Alternative for
Germany Party,
the right-wing anti-immigrant
party.
And they're going to create
hatred.
And that's really what their
main objective
is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, the
perpetrator is still
on the loose.
Is there fear that he or she may
strike again?
MALCOLM BRABANT: That certainly
is the worry.
And people are being advised to
stay indoors.
The police are very much
concerned.
The interior minister did say
that they do
have some leads and that the
police are following
up on those leads.
But they thought that they
actually had their
man in their sights, because the
person they
described as a brave witness to
the attacks
said that he followed the person
that he thought
was the truck driver.
He had driven through the
Christmas market,
and was in touch with police all
the time.
But it now appears that he may
have actually
lost sight of the target during
that particular
time, which is perhaps why the
wrong man was
arrested.
But there are certainly fears
that there will
be attacks again, and there are
armed police
at other Christmas markets
around there.
One pretty good indication of
just how tense
things are, there was a federal
prosecutor
who was giving a press
conference in Germany
earlier today, and he said that
he certainly
wouldn't go to any Christmas
markets, which
is hardly an endorsement of the
state of security
here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: No, it isn't.
Malcolm Brabant in Berlin, thank
you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
Turkish police detained seven
people in the
assassination of Russia's
ambassador.
Andrey Karlov was shot dead
yesterday at an
art gallery in Ankara.
His remains were flown back to
Moscow today,
after a memorial ceremony.
Turkey's deputy prime minister
insisted the
killing won't damage relations
with Russia.
TUGRUL TURKES, Turkish Deputy
Prime Minister
(through translator): Those who
ordered and
carried out this attack didn't
kill Ambassador
Andrey Karlov.
They created a new place for him
in history.
Ambassador Andrey Karlov has
become an eternal
symbol for Turkish-Russian
friendship.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The gunman was
a police
officer.
He shouted slogans about Aleppo
in Syria and
about jihad before being killed
by security
forces.
So far, there's been no claim of
responsibility.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Syria, buses
evacuated more
people from East Aleppo, as the
Syrian army
warned that it's about to enter
the last rebel
enclave.
Estimates of how many people
have left the
city varied from 19,000 to more
than 37,000.
But rebels said thousands are
still waiting
for transport.
Meanwhile, in Moscow, Russia,
Iran and Turkey
announced they're ready to
broker a final
Syrian peace, leaving President
Bashar al-Assad
in power.
SERGEI LAVROV, Russian Foreign
Minister (through
translator): Our main priority
shouldn't be
the regime change, but defeating
terrorist
threats.
I am sure that we will be able
to formulate
our common approaches, based on
the goals
we have declared, to win over
terrorism, to
restore territorial integrity,
sovereignty,
independence and unity of the
Syrian Arab
republic.
We are united in that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The talks were
held without
the U.S. or the U.N. being
represented.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Security
forces in Congo
killed at least three protesters
today and
arrested dozens more.
They were opposing President
Joseph Kabila's
decision to stay in office.
His term ended overnight, but
new elections
have been delayed indefinitely.
Police and troops used live fire
and tear
gas against protesters who took
to the streets
in the capital city, Kinshasa.
U.N. officials in armored
carriers tried to
keep the peace.
JUDY WOODRUFF: China has
returned an American
underwater drone that it seized
last week
in the South China Sea.
It was handed back to the U.S.
Navy today.
The Pentagon called it an
illegal seizure
in international waters.
Beijing blamed U.S. surveillance
in waters
facing China.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Back in this
country, president-elect
Trump interviewed more job
candidates and
took time to confront former
President Clinton.
A suburban New York City
newspaper had quoted
Mr. Clinton as saying the
incoming president
-- quote -- "doesn't know much
besides how
to get angry white men to vote."
Mr. Trump tweeted back that
President Clinton
didn't even know how to turn out
voters and
-- quote -- "focused on the
wrong states."
JUDY WOODRUFF: First lady
Michelle Obama says
watching the election was --
quote -- "painful,"
but that she and the president
are supporting
the transition.
She spoke to Oprah Winfrey in
her final interview
as first lady.
It was broadcast Monday on CBS.
MICHELLE OBAMA, First Lady: It
is important
for the health of this nation
that we support
the commander in chief.
It wasn't done when my husband
took office,
but we're going high.
And this is what's best for the
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Obama family
officially
moves out of the White House one
month from
today.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Senate
majority leader
has again rejected calls for a
select committee
to investigate Russian
interference in the
election.
Mitch McConnell says he still
believes the
standing Intelligence Committee
can do the
job.
Several Republicans and
Democrats have called
for a special panel to be
created.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Volkswagen
reached a settlement
today with regulators and owners
of another
80,000 vehicles in its
emissions-cheating
scandal.
Under the terms, V.W. agrees to
buy back some
vehicles and fix others.
The company previously reached a
deal affecting
475,000 other cars, but it could
still face
criminal charges.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The state of
Michigan has
filed more criminal charges in
the investigation
of lead-tainted water in Flint.
Two former emergency managers of
the city
and two other former city
workers were charged
today with conspiracy and other
crimes.
State Attorney General Bill
Schuette said
the investigation isn't over,
and he vowed
to get justice.
BILL SCHUETTE (R), Michigan
Attorney General:
Flint was a casualty of
arrogance, disdain
and a failure of management, an
absence of
accountability, shirking
responsibility.
Flint deserves better.
The people of Flint are not
expendable.
So, to move on is unacceptable.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All told, 13
people have
been charged in the ongoing
investigation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
today banned
future oil and gas drilling in
most federal
waters of the Atlantic and
Arctic oceans.
It's one of his last major
environmental moves.
President-elect Trump has called
for more
offshore drilling, but it's not
clear if he
can reverse today's action
without going to
court.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On Wall
Street, the rally
resumed as bank stocks surged.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 91
points to close at 19974.
The Nasdaq rose 26 points, and
the S&P 500
added eight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the Rock and
Roll Hall
of Fame introduced its latest
inductees today.
They include the late rapper
Tupac Shakur,
whose 1996 murder is still
unsolved, the Seattle
band Pearl Jam, who popularized
grunge rock
in the '90s, and Joan Baez,
political activist
and mainstay of the folk
movement.
The formal induction is next
April.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Still to come
on the "NewsHour":
we speak with Donald Trump
senior adviser
Kellyanne Conway; President
Obama's final
push to transfer Guantanamo Bay
prisoners;
women scramble for
contraceptives as access
hangs in the balance; and much
more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we turn now
to the Trump
transition.
Kellyanne Conway is senior
adviser to the
president-elect.
Kellyanne Kellyanne Conway,
thank you for
talking with us.
Mr. Trump has now been certified
the winner
by the Electoral College, but,
as you know,
there are still questions out
there about
the Russian government's role
and whether
it influenced the outcome of
this election
in favor of Mr. Trump.
My question to you is, since we
now have this
joint -- or what appears to be
agreement by
the intelligence community that
the Russian
government was involved and they
were trying
to help Mr. Trump, is he going
to ask for
this information that they have,
so he can
satisfy himself?
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump Senior
Adviser: Well,
I don't really agree with that
premise in
full, Judy, only because we have
leaks to
the media, rather than CIA
officials showing
up at closed-door House
Intelligence Committee
briefings, where they were
invited.
And instead of doing that, they
went and talked
to the media.
I have not seen a report.
I have not seen the evidence
that they were
trying the influence the
election.
That's what everybody is doing
to confuse
and conflate here.
Also, I would just point out
very logically
that I don't remember the
Clinton team in
those last days before the
election having
Jay-Z or Beyonce or President
Obama or President
Bill Clinton out there saying,
look, we want
to warn you all that there is a
chance Hillary
Clinton is actually going to
lose because
of Russian hacking and they're
trying to influence
the election.
That is just not true.
They weren't saying that.
They were pretty confident it
was going to
be a blowout and that they were
going to take
the House and Senate with them.
So I understand the
hand-wringing and the
breast-beating continues on the
left, but
let's be fair.
We're not going to interfere
with anything
the legislature wants to do,
certainly.
But, secondly, let's be clear as
to what this
really is.
It's pure politics.
And you even have the president
of the United
States, President Obama, in his
final press
conference last Friday, Judy,
not going as
far as saying he believes that
the Russians
hacked in and tried to interfere
with the
elections.
In fact, he said when he told
Putin to -- quote
-- "cut it out," that Putin did.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, my
question, though,
is, since Mr. Trump has access
now to pretty
much any intelligence he wants,
can he simply
just get this information and
satisfy himself
once and for all whether it's
true?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Perhaps.
And perhaps he has.
But, again, everybody wants to
will litigate
this in the media.
And he's the president-elect of
the United
States.
Barack Obama is the president of
the United
States until January 20.
And we're respectful of that.
And we all must be respectful of
the fact
that those two gentlemen and
others are going
to have information that the
rest of us don't.
But that's not what this is
about.
This is about -- some of them
think it's Jim
Comey's fault.
The others blame the movement.
The others blame Bernie Sanders:
How dare
he run in the first place?
The guy won 22 states and over
13 million
voters, and, of course, Russian
hacking.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you -- let
me turn you to what Mr. Trump
tweeted yesterday
after the incidents in Europe.
Among other things, he said --
he referred
to terror attacks in Turkey,
Switzerland,
and Germany.
He issued statements about
Islamist terrorists.
But we now know German and
Turkish officials
say they don't have all the
information.
They don't know the genesis of
what happened.
And we know what happened in
Switzerland.
They're saying this is someone
who was obsessed
with the occult, had killed a
friend of his
before he committed suicide.
So, my question is, should Mr.
Trump have
waited for more information
before he tweeted
and made a statement?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: What the
president-elect
knows is that people across this
country and
indeed world are afraid of
terrorism, and
they have a reason to.
Most predominantly, in the last
couple years,
Judy, it has been radical
Islamic terrorism
-- terrorists who have done
their massacre,
certainly in Europe and, of
course, the United
States, in Orlando and in San
Bernardino.
So, the fact is that he will
continue to denounce
these acts of terror.
He will continue to send
condolences to the
families of those who have lost.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But my question
is, should
he be making public statements
before the
information is in?
Does he not have a
responsibility to wait
until the authorities have
looked into it?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, he's
very responsible.
And I would point out I remember
-- I believe
it was during Orlando or San
Bernardino -- we
will have to look -- but he
blamed radical
Islamic terrorism then, and
people attacked
him for doing that before he had
all the information.
Of course, he was correct.
I don't remember people
apologizing or saying,
gee, you're even ahead of it.
You're always ahead of it.
Your instincts are right.
But the fact remains that this
president-elect
and this future commander in
chief is much
more serious about stopping and
eradicating,
as he says, radical terrorists
of all strains.
But we know that ISIS is really
on the advance.
We know that it's just false
when people call
them the J.V. team and that
they're not on
the advance.
And we will see.
We will see what the authorities
end up saying.
But it doesn't change the fact
that, because
we're not as serious about
terrorism as we
can be, that people all across
the globe feel
like they can just murder
innocent people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you
about something
that President Obama said in his
news conference
on Friday.
He said: "By so many measures,
our country
is stronger and more prosperous
than it was
when we started."
He said: "It's a situation I'm
proud to leave
for my successor.
It's thanks to the American
people, to the
work you have put in, the
sacrifices you have
made."
Does Mr. Trump believe what Mr.
Obama said,
that the country is stronger and
more prosperous
as a result or at the end of the
Obama presidency?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, by some
measures,
we are.
But if you look at the polls,
Americans don't
feel that way.
If they felt that way, they
would have given
Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama
a third term.
He himself campaigned mightily
across the
country for her, basically
making that case.
He said to people, I will take
it personally,
this is my legacy on the line.
And people rejected that call.
I think people feel like there
is a little
bit of unfinished business,
Judy.
There is no question that you
have millions
of Americans still lacking
health insurance.
You have millions of Americans,
particularly
women and children, in poverty
as you and
I speak tonight.
You have a lot of unfinished
business, but
obviously every president who
leaves, particularly
after two terms, can point to
many different
areas where there has been
progress and there
has been change.
And I would expect President
Obama to do what
President George W. Bush did
when he left,
and President Bill Clinton when
he left, which
is to point to those numbers of
improvement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me finally
ask you about
what President Obama did today.
He announced a ban on new oil
and gas drilling
on the Atlantic Coast from New
England to
the Chesapeake Bay.
Canada announced something in
conjunction
with this.
Is this something that Mr. Trump
is going
to let stand?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, I would
need to discuss
that with him, and he will make
those decisions
as the president.
But I will remind us all what
his policy towards
energy is.
It's basically -- and everybody
can read it
for themselves.
As part of his 100-day plan,
Judy, president-elect
Trump has made very clear that
unleashing
our energy sources here at home
is an incredibly
important aspect of that.
Why?
Because we need to invest in all
energy sources,
including coal and shale.
We have energy literally off our
shores and
under our feet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it sounds
like he's going
to reverse it, from what you're
saying.
(CROSSTALK)
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, it makes
us more -- well,
you're asking me about a
specific policy move,
and I can't comment on that.
It would be unfair to the
president-elect.
But I will tell you, if you look
at his plan,
he's going to go farther than
other presidents
have gone in terms of making us
more dependent
on ourselves energy-wise, and to
create billions
of dollars in revenue, millions
of jobs, some
people project, over time.
And it also means that we're
less dependent
on some of these foreign powers
for our energy
sources, which I know many
Americans would
appreciate.
What's a major concern that
people, major
grievance Americans lodge, Judy?
It's, we don't make anything in
America anymore.
Well, you know what?
Energy is in America.
And if we can tap into that
safely and appropriately,
I guarantee that is something
that President
Trump will certainly look into
in a very serious
way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kellyanne Conway,
adviser to
the president-elect, we thank
you.
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Thank you,
Judy.
All the best.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And in other
White House
news, according to a New York
Times report,
the Obama administration has
notified Congress
it plans to transfer 17 or 18
prisoners from
the detention center at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
before president-elect Trump
takes office.
In all, the military prison has
housed nearly
780 detainees.
That number was down to 242 by
time President
Obama took office.
Today, there are 59 remaining,
including 22
who have been approved for
transfer to other
countries.
That's if certain security
conditions were
met there.
After this latest batch of
transfers, 41 or
42 prisoners would be left at
Guantanamo Bay
for Mr. Trump's administration
to handle.
Joining me now for more on this
process is
Charlie Savage.
He's a Washington correspondent
at The New
York Times and author of "Power
Wars: Inside
Obama's Post-9/11 Presidency."
Thanks for joining us.
So, who are these batch of
prisoners that
are being transferred?
Why them and why not the rest of
them?
CHARLIE SAVAGE, The New York
Times: Right.
So, of the men at Guantanamo,
not all of them
are cleared for transfer.
There's 10 that are facing
charges before
a military commission, and
there's about just
under 30 who the government has
not charged
with a crime, but officials
believe they are
still too dangerous to release.
And so they continue to be held
as wartime
detainees, essentially.
And then there are these lists
you mentioned
of about 22 men.
That's the remnants of what used
to be a very
long list of people who six
agencies looked
at and decided could be safely
released, as
long as they went to a country
that could
provide certain security
assurances, like
monitoring them and preventing
them from travel
and so forth.
In his last sort of second part
of his second
term, Obama has made a big push
to get that
list down as close to zero as he
can before
he leaves office, even if he
fails to close
the prison.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, closing
the prison
was something the president
wanted, but it
also had bipartisan support.
Why didn't it happen?
CHARLIE SAVAGE: So, you're
right.
The Bush administration in its
second term
wanted to close Guantanamo.
And in the 2008 presidential
election, both
Obama and his Republican
opponent, John McCain,
said that they would close
Guantanamo.
So, when Obama came in and said
he would close
the prison within a year, it
looked like it
wasn't a partisan or a
controversial policy
to be working towards.
But the politics shifted under
his feet over
the course of 2009-2010.
And so, at that point, Congress
started imposing
restrictions on the transfers of
detainees,
including eventually banning
them and their
transfer to the United States
for any purpose.
And President Obama's plan,
often overlooked,
for closing Guantanamo wasn't to
release every
detainee who could not be
charged with a crime.
There was that group of two or
three dozen
who the administration itself
thought was
too dangerous to release, but
could not be
charged.
And his plans, then, to close
the prison as
to move them to a different
prison in the
United States, where they would
be cheaper
to house and where the symbolic
sort of notoriety
of Guantanamo, the location the
Bush administration
had used, would go away.
So, once Congress banned him
from bringing
prisoners into the United
States, that plan
could not work.
And, therefore, basically, he
wasn't going
to close it.
And the only question was, would
the U.S.
get rid of the people at least
that it didn't
actually want to hold, this long
list of detainees
approved for transfer?
HARI SREENIVASAN: What about
concerns about
recidivism?
CHARLIE SAVAGE: The reengagement
rate of detainees
who were released in the Bush
administration
is about 30 percent, suspected
or confirmed,
a little over 30 percent.
And that's because, during the
Bush years,
large numbers of detainees were
sent home
to places like Afghanistan and
Saudi Arabia
in bulk transfers after
President Bush decided
to start trying to close the
prison.
The Obama administration has
pursued a different
approach, an individualized
approach.
It has a process where six
national security
agencies look at individual
detainees and
have to agree that that person
is releasable.
And there's a lot more planning
for where
they're going to go and what
kind of sort
of reentry into society,
monitoring, travel
restrictions and so forth
they're going to
encounter once they get out.
And that has brought down the
recidivism rate
for Obama era transfers to about
12 percent,
confirmed or suspected.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What do we
know about the
Trump administration's plans for
Guantanamo
Bay?
CHARLIE SAVAGE: President Trump
has said he
will keep Guantanamo open and
that he will
bring new detainees there.
He famously said he would load
it up with
some bad dudes.
Obama, of course, was trying to
close it and
failed, but didn't bring anyone
new there
in his entire eight years as
president, and
chipped away at the detainee
population.
So, I think we can safely
predict that, sooner
or later, in the Trump
administration, the
United States government will
capture a terrorism
suspect and bring him to
Guantanamo.
And he will be the first new
prisoner there
in quite a long time.
What we don't know is whether
president-elect
Trump intends to shut down all
transfers of
lower-level detainees to get rid
of the six-agency
review kind of parole board-like
process,
or whether he will continue that
just without -- not using it
very often.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How much does
it cost to
keep Guantanamo running?
CHARLIE SAVAGE: The operating
cost of Guantanamo
in 2015 was $450 million.
And so if the Obama
administration does succeed
in getting roughly 18, plus or
minus, detainees
out, that would break down to a
ratio of about
$10 million per detainee per
year to house
them at Guantanamo.
There are some asterisks to
that, because
that figure includes the cost of
the military
commission system as well, which
is not cheap
at all.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Charlie Savage
of The New
York Times, thanks so much.
CHARLIE SAVAGE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we have a
story about possible
changes as a result of the
election.
Some American women say they
fear they could
lose their access to birth
control once president-elect
Trump takes office.
Trump has pledged to repeal the
Affordable
Care Act, which includes free
contraceptives.
He hasn't said what would
replace it, and
that's why the women in this
story are taking
action.
Correspondent Lisa Desjardins
has the story.
LISA DESJARDINS: Morning in
Baltimore, oven-baked
biscuits and a warm moment for
Victoria Cross
and fiance Cameron Okeke (ph).
Today, Victoria's getting an
IUD, or intrauterine
device, a form of birth control
that works
for several years.
The young couple isn't shy about
their family
planning.
They can't be.
Twenty-three-year-old Victoria
is at high
risk for miscarriages due to a
genetic tissue
disorder.
She's used monthly birth control
pills for
years, but something changed
election night.
VICTORIA CROSS, Baltimore: Yes,
thought immediately
about abortion access,
immediately about birth
control access and how expensive
birth control
was when.
So I pretty immediately called
my gynecologist
and: I want to talk to you.
Help.
LISA DESJARDINS: Dr. Stacey
Leigh Rubin of
Johns Hopkins, Victoria's
gynecologist, says
many patients and non-patients
have reached
out.
DR.
STACEY LEIGH RUBIN, Johns
Hopkins: Distant
acquaintances and old classmates
contacting
me on Facebook with concerns and
questions
about what IUDs are and how they
can get them.
LISA DESJARDINS: It's a real
surge in interest.
DR.
STACEY LEIGH RUBIN: It is a real
surge in
interest.
LISA DESJARDINS: An IUD is
usually plastic
and inserted in the uterus to
prevent pregnancy.
IUDs are considered among the
most effective
birth control methods, but
they're not cheap,
running up to $1,000.
DR.
STACEY LEIGH RUBIN: So, what
questions do
you have about these different
methods and
what do you think you're leaning
towards?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right now, for
Victoria and
other women, IUDs and all birth
control is
free, because the Obama
administration considers
it a preventative procedure, a
category that
the Affordable Care Act says
must be cost-free
to the patient.
Enter a new White House.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: Repealing
Obamacare is one of the single
most important
reasons we must win on November
8.
LISA DESJARDINS: President-elect
Donald Trump
campaigned on repealing and
replacing the
Affordable Care Act.
He notably has not said exactly
how he will
handle the contraceptive
benefit.
But others close to him have
talked about
it.
MIKE PENCE (R), Vice
President-Elect: I'm
a Christian, a conservative and
a Republican,
in that order.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: vice
president-elect Mike
Pence, speaking on a radio show
in October,
highlighted religious groups
opposed to contraception,
and their religious freedom.
MIKE PENCE: Our administration
is going to
err on the side of freedom.
We are going to err on the side
of protecting
the liberties of our people.
LISA DESJARDINS: A key voice
will be Mr. Trump's
pick to head the Department of
Health and
Human Services, orthopedic
surgeon and Georgia
Representative Tom Price.
He's echoed concern for
religious values and,
in 2012, questioned if
contraceptive costs
were an issue for women.
REP.
TOM PRICE (R), Georgia: Bring me
one woman
who has been left behind.
Bring me one.
There's not one.
The fact of the matter is, this
is a trampling
on religious freedom and
religious liberty
in this country.
LISA DESJARDINS: Price's old
comment struck
an already watchful Internet.
Immediately after the election,
Google searches
for IUD spiked and Twitter saw
phrases like
"get an IUD" jump in popularity.
What are the wallet
implications?
A University of Pennsylvania
study found that
the Obama contraception policy
saved IUD and
birth control pill users an
average of roughly
$250 a year.
DR.
STACEY LEIGH RUBIN: No-cost
birth control
has been a game-changer for
women.
And the idea of going back to
high out-of-pocket
costs for contraception is
distressing.
LISA DESJARDINS: But will Trump
change those
costs?
Someone with insight is Marjorie
Dannenfelser.
She led what Trump called his
Pro-Life Coalition,
and runs the anti- abortion
group the Susan
B. Anthony List.
Dannenfelser says neither she
nor Trump want
to weigh in on the morality of
contraception,
but when it comes to the no-cost
mandate:
MARJORIE DANNENFELSER,
President, Susan B.
Anthony List: He and I also
agree that religious
and any individual deserves the
right to a
conscience, and they shouldn't
be forced to
pay for things that they find
are undermining
of that conscience.
So, yes, I believe that he will
undo that
mandate, and he will be right to
do so.
LISA DESJARDINS: That leads to
another question
about the president-elect: How
quickly could
a President Trump change
contraception coverage,
and therefore out-of-pocket
cost?
Relatively quickly.
You see, the contraception
mandate is not
a law.
It's a rule put in place by HHS.
And HHS, under a Trump White
House, could
change that rule without input
from Congress.
Women like Victoria are making
decisions now,
as she and her friends remain
uncertain.
VICTORIA CROSS: We talked a lot
about our
own reproductive health and
where do we go
from here and how do we prepare
for this new
administration, where our access
may go away?
LISA DESJARDINS: Victoria's new
birth control
will last up to five years.
That's one year longer than the
four years
of Donald Trump's first term.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins
in Baltimore.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Bruce Springsteen
on his bouts of depression, his
love of books,
and president-elect Trump.
But first: a story about an
effort in Flint,
Michigan, to help its youngest
residents cope
with the possible effects of
lead-contaminated
water.
It's part of our weekly series
on education,
Making the Grade.
HARI SREENIVASAN: More than a
year after alarmingly
high levels of lead were found
in Flint's
water supply, the city has
opened a free all-day
early childhood center for
children 2 months
to 5 years of age.
BOB BARNETT, University of
Michigan: It's
for any children currently
living in Flint
or were living in Flint when
lead exposure
was at its worst.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Bob Barnett, a
dean of education
for the University of Michigan
in Flint, helped
create the new early learning
program.
BOB BARNETT: We made phone
calls.
We went door to door to every
single neighborhood
in the city.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Barnett had a
mission, to
reach families with the youngest
children.
That's because lead is a
neurotoxin that targets
the developing brain.
DR.
MONA HANNA-ATTISHA, Hurley
Medical Center:
A child's brain doubles in size
from zero
to 2.
And when you have these insults
to the developing
brain at such a young age, it
really impacts
that entire trajectory of
learning.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mona
Hanna-Attisha, a pediatrician
who discovered elevated lead
levels in Flint's
children, says there's a
well-established
link between lead exposure and
learning disabilities.
DR.
MONA HANNA-ATTISHA: Lead has
been shown to
drop children's I.Q., so it
impacts how they
think, and it impacts how they
act.
It has been linked to
attention-deficit disorder,
impulsivity, many other
developmental delays.
And so it has these
life-course-altering
consequences.
HARI SREENIVASAN: More than
5,000 of Flint's
youngest children were put in
danger when
the city switched to a new water
source, the
Flint River, in the spring of
2014, causing
lead from aging pipes to leach
into the system.
Since then, Flint officials have
switched
back to Lake Huron for their
water supply,
and although lead levels have
been dramatically
reduced, residents are still
urged to use
bottled or filtered water for
everything from
drinking to bathing.
The lead exposure lasted only 18
months, but
health officials say a threat
still exists.
DR.
MONA HANNA-ATTISHA: Imagine
these little babies
who were on formula, and all
they're getting
is this lead-tainted water mixed
with powdered
formula for the entire year, not
that they're
all going to have problems.
And we're not going to wait to
see who is
going to have problems.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Hanna-Attisha
sees the new
child care facility as a needed
intervention.
DR.
MONA HANNA-ATTISHA: The most
important medication
that I can prescribe to our
Flint kids is
early education.
People are like, you're a
doctor.
Don't you want like, you know,
health care
stuff?
I'm like, no, I want early
education.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The center is
an expansion
of a high-quality program called
Great Expectations
Early Childhood run by the
University of Michigan
in Flint.
BOB BARNETT: We know that lead
exposure, especially
in our youngest children, birth
to 5, affects
their cognition and their
behavior.
We also know that the impact of
early childhood
education and intervention can
counter that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The free
program has been
able to accommodate 240
children.
Another 220 families remain on
the wait-list.
Major donations from 10
foundations, as well
as millions from the state of
Michigan, cover
tuition costs as high as $15,000
to $20,000
per child per year.
Joyce Sanders says she and her
husband could
not have afforded the program
for their 3-year-old
daughter, Nyla (ph).
Sanders is anxious to protect
her child's
ability to learn.
JOYCE SANDERS, Mother: She's so
incredibly
bright.
And it's terrifying to think
that this exposure
could take that away from her.
It is terrifying.
And I'm trying to do everything
I can to give
her the resources, so that she
can hold on
to that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Nyla and her
5-year-old
sister, Kaia (ph), both tested
positive for
low levels of lead in their
blood.
But because lead has a short
window of detection
in the bloodstream, Sanders is
unsure how
much her children ingested.
JOYCE SANDERS: I don't really
know what their
exposure level is.
Every time they get anything,
I'm worried:
Is this something that I'm
missing?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Like many
parents in Flint,
the experience has left Sanders
feeling uneasy.
JOYCE SANDERS: I have noticed
with my daughter
Nyla, she can sometimes get
upset, and it's
very, very hard to calm her
down.
And that just may be one of
those quirky things,
or it could mean something.
And if it means something,
that's huge.
And so those type of things are
always in
the back of my mind.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Great
Expectations uses
the Reggio Emilia teaching
approach, which
emphasizes emotional well-being,
something
educators believe is a good fit
for kids with
possible lead exposure.
Lead teacher Katie McCormack:
KATIE MCCORMACK, Great
Expectations: We're
working a lot with impulse
control, so everyone
can listen, everyone can take
turns and pay
attention.
We really want to just see where
they are
at developmentally.
DR.
MONA HANNA-ATTISHA: These early
childhood
teachers are actually brain
builders.
They're building these kids'
neural connections.
It is unethical for us to sit
back and wait
and study these kids in five, 10
years, and
say, oh, look at the impact of
lead exposure.
We must be proactive.
We must be preventative.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The new center
is housed
in one of Flint's shuttered
elementary schools.
The city's school enrollment has
declined
dramatically since the 1980s,
when car manufacturing
jobs started disappearing.
Flint school's superintendent,
Bilal Tawwab.
BILAL TAWWAB, Superintendent,
Flint Community
School: Right now, we have only
5,000 kids
in Flint Community Schools.
At one time, there was about
50,000 kids.
Actually, we have more closed
buildings than
open buildings.
HARI SREENIVASAN: More than 40
percent of
Flint's residents live below the
poverty line.
And Superintendent Tawwab says
using vacant
buildings for early education
coupled with
good nutrition will better
prepare Flint's
children.
BILAL TAWWAB: I would like to
believe this
is just the start of some very,
very important
work.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But while
educators hope
to expand the program, there's
only enough
money to serve 240 of the 5,000
to 6,000 children
in the city.
And even those slots are
operating on limited
three-years grants.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we reported
earlier, Michigan's
attorney general filed criminal
charges against
city officials in Flint for
operating that
city's water systems in an
unsafe manner.
Well, it turns out Flint is not
alone in having
a lead contamination problem.
Two recent news investigation
find two startling
numbers.
A Reuters investigation of lead
levels in
blood found nearly 3,000 areas
in the country
with contamination levels higher
than those
in Flint.
And a USA Today report found
that some four
million Americans get water from
utilities
that do not meet federal safe
drinking water
standards.
Laura Ungar was a lead reporter
on the USA
Today investigation.
And she joins me now.
Laura Ungar, welcome to the
program.
You and your colleagues focused
on smaller
communities around the country.
Why?
LAURA UNGAR, USA Today: Well, we
wanted to
look at the problem beyond Flint
and look
to see just how big the scope
was.
And so, basically, we looked at
where the
problem was the worst, and we
found that,
in these small water systems,
which are generally
located in rural areas, small,
remote communities,
the problem was worse in those
communities.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And give us an
example of what
you found.
You got a number of families you
write about
in this series.
LAURA UNGAR: Yes.
For example, one family in
Ranger, Texas,
they have a situation where
their 2-year-old
son has high levels of lead in
his blood.
And they lived there for about a
year, almost
a year, before finding out from
a citywide
letter that they had high lead
in their city,
in their city's water supply.
And then they -- actually, their
tap was tested,
and they didn't find out the
results of that
from the city.
They found it out from me,
actually.
I told them the levels that were
found in
their own tap.
So -- and they were very upset
about that
situation, because, you know,
their son is
2, and he's facing high lead,
which, as you
know, just causes all sorts of
problems with
children.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, again, it
wasn't just
this one small community.
You found something like four
million Americans
affected.
LAURA UNGAR: Yes, it's more than
four million.
That four million is places
where -- or people
affected by places that either
tested improperly
or skipped tests.
There are even more than that
when you talk
about where high lead has been
found and,
in some cases, has not been
fixed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sorry.
Didn't mean to interrupt.
But why is it that some of these
smaller communities
don't have the stringent
regulations that
larger population areas do?
LAURA UNGAR: What -- the
rationale that I
have heard for the difference in
the rules
is the resource difference.
There's a vastly different --
vastly different
resources between the large
water systems
in big cities and these small
which only serve a few thousand
people.
I mean, some of them are run by
folks who
may have another full-time job.
We found one place where, for
example, a farmer/rancher
ran a water system in his spare
time.
And he tried his best, but it's
part-time
thing.
And that's a much different
situation than
in a large water system, where
you might have
very educated folks and large
staffs dealing
with water quality.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, finally, who
is responsible?
The Environmental Protection
Agency, I know
you talked to them.
What do they say?
How do they explain it?
LAURA UNGAR: They -- there's
layers of responsibility.
First of all, there's the
utility.
There's the states that are
supposed to be
enforcing those federal safe
drinking water
standards.
And then, ultimately, the buck
stops at the
EPA.
The EPA does tell me that they
are focusing
on these small water systems,
that they do
hope to make improvements in
this area.
But it's a multifaceted problem,
and with
no easy answers at all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, some
excellent reporting.
And I know you are going to be
following up
on that.
Laura Ungar with USA Today,
thank you.
LAURA UNGAR: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
part two of
Jeffrey Brown's conversation
with Bruce Springsteen.
The working-class rock 'n' roll
hero talks
about his lifelong bouts of
depression, his
love of reading, and the
election of Donald
Trump.
JEFFREY BROWN: On a visit with
Bruce Springsteen
at his home in rural New Jersey,
most of the
talk, of course, was about
music, the core
of his life and career.
But part of the story he tells
about his rise
to the world stage also involved
books, what
he describes in his memoir as
his self-education.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN, Musician: I
think, when
I discovered the Russian guys,
they were -- that
was...
JEFFREY BROWN: The Russians did
it?
(LAUGHTER)
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: That was the
big thing.
JEFFREY BROWN: You mean like the
big hitters,
like Dostoyevsky and Tolstoy and
those guys?
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: The big
hitters, yes.
Yes, when I got into "Anna
Karenina" and "Brothers
Karamazov" and "Crime and
Punishment," that
was the stuff that -- that had a
big effect
on me, because it was so
psychological.
JEFFREY BROWN: Does your reading
affect your
writing as a songwriter?
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: I think it
affects you
internally in a way that's not
immediately
evident, but that it simply
increases your
frame of reference.
You learn more about the craft
of writing,
what good writing feels like.
But, mostly, it just enlarges
you as an individual.
The one thing I wished for my
children is
that they'd be readers.
And...
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, and are
they, because
that's what I was going to ask
you, because,
nowadays..
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: No.
No.
JEFFREY BROWN: They're not.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Their father
didn't make himself
a reader until around 30, so the
kids, in
their 20s, still have time.
By that point, Springsteen had
become a major
rock star.
But, in his 30s, he also
suffered a serious
bout of depression, something he
would struggle
with throughout his life,
including an episode
as recently as his early 60s,
all while keeping
up a rigorous touring and
recording career.
Springsteen, now 67, credits his
wife, Patti,
and years of counseling and
antidepressants
with getting him through.
He writes candidly of these
struggles in his
new memoir.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: It was a big
enough part
of my life to where it felt like
it needed
to be included in the book, you
know?
And, also, I think it was an
insight into
some of your creative fire,
where it comes
from.
I wrote -- the premise of the
book was to
give my audience an insight into
how I created,
and what were -- what's the fuel
for the fire.
JEFFREY BROWN: You see them as
combined, twined.
There's a kind of trope of many
artists of
creativity and madness.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: Mental
illness and creativity
are -- it's a thin line in
between the two.
I tend to believe that.
I don't know many artists who
are not crazy.
Most of the artists I know are
crazy in one
way or another.
I think that's why you get into
it.
You're in pursuit of a certain
sort of peace
that's very, very, very
difficult to come
by.
And I realized the only time I
felt complete
and peaceful was while I was
playing or shortly
afterwards, even though it was
in front of
thousands of other people, which
most people
wouldn't consider to be a safe
place.
For me...
JEFFREY BROWN: No, they
wouldn't.
So, why is that a safe place?
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: For me, it's
always been.
For me, once I count the band
in, and I delve
deep into my song, I feel a
certain sort of
integrity and integration that I
rarely find
in my daily life.
It's better now than it used to
be, but it's
still something that, if I want
to deeply
experience it, I walk on stage,
I play, I
perform, I create, I write.
And that's where sort of that
peace comes
over me.
JEFFREY BROWN: As he matured as
an artist,
Springsteen's music took on
issues of the
political culture, Vietnam,
poverty, those
left behind in the 2008
recession.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: I integrated
it because
politics and life go hand in
hand.
And so it needed to be a part of
my music.
Thus, the different social
forces that affected
my parents' lives or my friends'
lives or
I saw around me became essential
for me to
write about.
JEFFREY BROWN: He also became
more up front
in his own politics, joining
Barack Obama
on the campaign trail, and, in
the recent
election, supporting Hillary
Clinton.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: I was going
around the
world swearing -- I was betting
on Hillary,
going around the world,
interview after interview.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you were
wrong, like many
people.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: Yes.
Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: But what explains
it?
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: I think a lot
of things.
I think that people with
legitimate concerns
about how -- how are you going
to live, how
are you going to -- where are
you going to
find your jobs?
Deindustrialization that I have
written about
for 40 years left a good part of
the American
public behind.
And I think if somebody comes up
and simply
says, your jobs?
I'm going to bring them back.
You're not comfortable with the
browning of
America?
I'm going to build a wall.
ISIS, I'm going to defeat them.
Those are very -- it's a simple,
but it was
a compelling message for a lot
of people.
And...
JEFFREY BROWN: But these are the
people that
you have been writing about for
all those
years.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: Yes, that's
true.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, did you lose
touch with
them?
Did they lose touch with you?
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: It was just a
very divided
country, you know, a very
divided country.
And I don't really know another
way to explain
it.
While I didn't think that Donald
Trump's message
was credible enough to affect
the vote to
that degree, I was wrong, and it
was.
JEFFREY BROWN: In this book, you
often talk
about telling your story, but
also telling
our story, which has come
through in your
music, right, telling a story of
this country.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: Yes.
Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: How do we bridge
divides in
this country?
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: I think you
can't demonize
somebody that's on the other
side of the political
spectrum, or you can't
generalize about them.
I know people on both sides of
that particular
divide.
And they just have a different
opinion about
it.
So, I think that maybe look
outside your own
daily experience also, which is
something
that, as a writer, that was sort
of something
that meant a great deal to me.
That's probably -- I mean,
that's been my
story over -- to tell over the
past 40 years.
And there's common ground in it.
But it's going to take a while
to see where
it goes.
JEFFREY BROWN: In the meantime,
the music
continues.
Bruce Springsteen and The E
Street Band head
to Australia and New Zealand at
the beginning
of the new year.
From Central New Jersey, I'm
Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: A remarkable,
rare interview
with that man.
You can watch the full 40-minute
interview
with Bruce Springsteen on our
home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.